Arrays (#1928)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: proposals/p1928.md

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1928)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

Arrays are base component of almost of programming languages. In the current
stage of Carbon development, arrays are missed.

## Background

An array is a set of scalar data placed in contiguous memory locations, all of
the same type and type parameters. The scalar data that make up an array are the
array elements which can be referenced by unique indexes.

A nested array is an array of arrays which may be non-continuous in memory.

A multidimensional array is an array with more than two dimensions which is
continuous in memory.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces array internal representation, its declaration, and
indexing.

## Details

### Internal representation

For simplifying usage and raising safety of array usage, internal representation
of arrays contains additional metadata:
```cpp

>   struct {

Reviewer: Are you saying that the Carbon implementation has to use a struct with exactly this layout, or are you just illustrating what kind of information a Carbon array will carry at run-time?

Author: Just illustrating what kind of information a Carbon array will carry at run-time. I'm not sure that is best representation, especially when interacting with C++ is.

Reviewer: OK, then maybe it could be something like this instead:

```cpp
struct {
  std::vector<int32_t> dimension_sizes;
  std::unique_ptr<T[]> data;
}
```

That seems more self-documenting, at least for a C++ programmer. For example, you don't need to explain that `dimension_sizes` is an array, because the type tells you that.

Author: I changed it to:
```cpp
template <typename T, int32_t N>
struct Array {
  std::array<int32_t, N> dimension_sizes;
  std::unique_ptr<T[]> data;
};
```

Number of dimensions for arrays shouldn't be changed.

>     int32_t dimensions;

Reviewer 2: Nit. I could definitely see some applications having 2gb character strings and this size being insufficient. A `uintptr_t` would work by definition.

But I'm also hesitant to have this in optimized builds. I don't know what the cost is, but it's certainly not free. Should this be only in debug and hardening modes?

Author: `dimensions` variable contains only number of dimensions. For example, `1` for 1D array and `2` for 2D array. It is the size of the following array. Anyway, you raised the problem and it is actual for the following `dimension_size` variable.

BTW, what is the problem with optimized builds? Does it different from `void func(void * data, int32_t data_len);`? Anyway, you should pass the length of your array (strings usually contains "\0", so we know where is the end).

Reviewer 2: I think the principle I'm relying on here is that, for optimized builds, we should make programmer errors undefined behavior so that the compiler is free to optimize assuming they do not exist. Certainly I see the value in catching these bugs in debug and hardened modes, but if I cannot remove debug information in optimized builds, we have left room for a lower level, more efficient language, failing at a core principle of the language.

For arrays whose length is known at compile-time, it is a programmer error to access the array out of bounds and so, for optimized builds, should be undefined behavior. Thus, for such arrays, there is no need to store the dimensions at all.

>     int32_t dimensions;

Reviewer: This proposal seems to be focused on the 1-D case, which means `dimensions` isn't needed yet, and `dimension_size` can just be an integer `size` instead of an array.

Author: Yes, but it would be better to keep in mind that multidimensional arrays will be necessary in future.

>     int32_t * dimension_size;

Reviewer 2: Where does this data live? Is it static? Is it mutable (i.e., can I change the shape of my array?)

Author: In implementation, it can be mutable but compiler should not provide possibility to change shapes nowadays. Later, it should be possible via standard library of Carbon. But it should be impossible to change number of dimensions.

> I could definitely see some applications having 2gb character strings and this size being insufficient.

Looks like here `uintptr_t` should be.

>     void * data;

Reviewer 2: What's the ownership model for this data?

Author: This data will be destroyed at the end of scope (or when calling destructors of base scope, like classes). Later, via standard library, it would be possible to destroy object earlier.

Reviewer 3: Is this really a pointer to the data or is the data stored in-line after the header information, eg `T * n`, where `n` is the product of all the `dimension_size`s?

Author: It is a pointer to the data. For example, in C++, to allocate some memory for array, then in Carbon code, to build header over array.

Reviewer 2: I suspect the most common uses for arrays in C++ today are to avoid the allocation intrinsic to `std::vector`. I think Carbon will want to have a guaranteed non-allocating array type.

Reviewer: > I think Carbon will want to have a guaranteed non-allocating array type.

No doubt, but I interpret this proposal as saying "the non-allocating array type gets some other type syntax" rather than "the non-allocating array type doesn't exist", although the proposal should probably be explicit about that.

That said, I think the non-allocating type should get this syntax, because I think we only have syntactic "room" for one built-in array type syntax, and all the other array types will need to be spelled like library types (e.g. `StaticArray(T, N)`). That being the case, I think it would be surprising and confusing if the array type that "looks built in" were not the lowest-level type.

(I think there will actually be two lowest-level array types -- the other one is what I referred to [here](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/discussions/1061) as `RuntimeSizedArray`. That one is much weirder and more awkward to use than either `std::array` or `std::vector`, so it definitely doesn't get to be the one with a built-in syntax.)

Reviewer 2: > we only have syntactic "room" for one built-in array type syntax

I don't think this has to be true at all, but I don't mind at all if we go that way.

Reviewer: > > we only have syntactic "room" for one built-in array type syntax
> 
> I don't think this has to be true at all, but I don't mind at all if we go that way.

Well, I'll put it this way: I think we should presume this is the only built-in array syntax, unless this PR also proposes a syntax for statically-sized arrays, so we assess how the language looks with both of them.

Author: > unless this PR also proposes a syntax for statically-sized arrays

I hope syntax for statically-sized and runtime-sized arrays will be close. Probably, the simplest change is to replace numbers with colon.

  } Array;
```
Here, `dimensions` contains information about number of dimensions (necessary
for multidimensional arrays), `dimension_size` is an array of size `dimensions`
containing sizes for each dimensions, and `data` is continuous in memory place
keeping scalar data.

This representation is closer to `std::vector<T>` rather then `T[]`. Then,
interoperability between C++ and carbon is limited.

One-dimensional and nested arrays have `dimensions = 1`.

> ### Declaration

Reviewer: In accordance with the principle that [all APIs are library APIs](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/docs/project/principles/library_apis_only.md), `[Type; Size]` will need to be an alias for some library class type, e.g. `Array(Type, Size)`. It would be good for this proposal to specify the name of that type.

Author: I took names from https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/discussions/1061

During declaration of arrays, it is more importantly to see type of variable.
It is the aim of the below presented alternatives of declaration.

Current realization:
```carbon
  var array_1D: [i32; 4];
  var array_2D: [i32; 4, 10]; // is not supported yet
  var array_nested: [[i32; 10]; 4];
```
In the case of nested array, definition of them a bit misunderstood due to
following indexing is inversed.

> Suggested in [#1787](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1787):

Reviewer: I think this and the other alternatives belong in the "Alternatives considered" section. This section should focus on what you're actually proposing.

```carbon
  var array_1D: [4; i32];
  var array_2D: [4, 10; i32];
  var array_nested: [4; [10; i32]];
```
This definition is deprived of a defect of previous definition, but the type is
the last one.

Alternatives:
```carbon
  var array_1D[4]: i32;
  var array_2D[4, 10]: i32;
  var array_nested[4][10]: i32;
```
In this alternative, `auto` will work only for types, not for dimensions of

> array.

Reviewer: More importantly, it makes the binding pattern syntax much more complicated and hard to explain. Right now a binding pattern always consists of the name being declared, a `:`, and then the type of that name, but with this syntax the type is split across both sides of the `:`.

Author: I dropped this alternative and added `Go`-like alternative

```carbon
  var array_1D: i32[4];
  var array_2D: i32[4, 10];
  var array_nested: i32[4][10];
```

> This definition requires contextual information since `i32[4]` is the same as

Reviewer 2: Relatedly, if types are treated as values (I don't know if that's something Carbon is aiming for), then in generic contexts `<expr>[1]` can mean dramatically different things.

Author: Yes. That is the problem for this definition. But this is most lovely definition for me.

Reviewer: > Relatedly, if types are treated as values (I don't know if that's something Carbon is aiming for), then in generic contexts `<expr>[1]` can mean dramatically different things.

Yes, Carbon is definitely aiming for that, so this is a major drawback.

> `array_1D[1]` so it is necessary to separate type and variable.

Reviewer: I don't understand why `i32[4]` would be the same as `array_1D[1]`, under this approach.

Reviewer 3: It seems like it might be possible to make that work, depending on how we specify `x[y]` (eg, `impl forall [N:! BigInt] Type as IndexableWith(IntLiteral(N)) where .Result == Type ...`), but it definitely seems like it'd be surprising in some cases and would probably significantly limit the semantics we can provide, such as variable-length arrays. (We might not *want* VLAs, but being unable to have them because of a syntactic choice would be concerning.)

Also, it is possible to declare array in function with runtime defined size:
```carbon
  fn f(n: i32) -> i32 {
    var arr: [n; i32];
    return 0;
  }
```

> Only of size is defined in compile-time and it is less than

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Only if size is defined in compile-time and it is less than
```

> `MAX_STACK_SIZE_ARRAY`, array is located in stack memory. Other definitions are

Reviewer 4: This might go against predictible performance, or be a gotcha. [std::array](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/array) for instance are predictible in that regard, and I believe we would want a similar predictible behavior.

Author: > This might go against predictible performance

I understand it. This definition can be easily be checked in compile time for showing warnings regarding to lower performance. Here, the point is that all `int array[n]` inside of function will work via `alloca`. std::array does not allow such construction since it required to have compile-time defined size of array.

Reviewer: I don't understand. This proposal says that the array is stored on the stack only if the size is fixed at compile time, so `alloca` would never be needed.

located in heap memory. It is especially important for the last example.

### Indexing

Indexing possible via integer values like in C style:
```carbon
  var array: [4; i32];
  var elem: auto = array[1];
```
and also via array:
```carbon
  var array_ind: [3; i32] = (0, 2, 4);
  var array: [5; i32] = (4, 3, 2, 1, 0);
  var arrav: auto = array[array_ind];
  // arrav == (array[0], array[2], array[4]) == (4, 2, 0)
```
Array indexing is useful if slices generate arrays.

Indexes are also possible on left-side expression:
```carbon
  var array: [6; i32] = (5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0);

>   array[(0,1,2)] = array[(3,4,5)]; // array = (2, 1, 0, 2, 1, 0)

Reviewer 2: What are the types of the left and right and side?

Author: left side is `[3; i32]` and right --- `[3; i32]`.

Reviewer 4: I haven't seen that syntax before, does that syntax exist in a different language?
It feels a bit unclear to me, and seems to force users to manually indicate individual indexes. Supporting ranges of indexes (for example like Python does `slice[begin:end]`) would be super valuable for sure.

Reviewer 2: Can I write `array[(0,2,4)] = array[(1,3,5)]`?
If so, I don't think the left-hand side can be an array. It would need to store references to each particular element that can be assigned to.

But to be honest, I'm not sure this passes the readability test for me (maybe it's just lack of familiarity?) It doesn't seem too bad to me to write
`(array[0], array[2], array[4]) = (array[1], array[3], array[5])`, or just three assignments.

Author: > I haven't seen that syntax before, does that syntax exist in a different language?

It exists in Fortran; see section 6.2.2.3.2 Vector subscript in [Draft of Fortran 2003 Standard](https://j3-fortran.org/doc/year/04/04-007.pdf).

> Supporting ranges of indexes <...> would be super valuable for sure.

See #1927. Slices will generate arrays then they may be used as indexes, so `array[begin:end]` will be possible with two these proposals.

> Can I write array[(0,2,4)] = array[(1,3,5)]?

Yes, you can. I checked what Fortran compiler do: it is just a simplification of cycles. The main idea why array should be indexes via arrays is slice usage.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @asoffer regarding the readability of `array[(0,2,4)] = array[(1,3,5)]`. To me it looks like we build arrays from tuples, or similar. I don't think we should allow (or at least promote) this kind of syntax. `(array[0], array[2], array[4]) = (array[1], array[3], array[5])` looks fine to me as well.

Reviewer 3: What would `array[(0,1)] = array[(1,0)];` do? Is that a swap, or does one of the elementwise assignments happen first? If it's a swap, then in general (with runtime indexes on both sides) would we form an intermediate array with the selected elements?

Author: @Pixep, I understand that `(array[0], array[2], array[4]) = (array[1], array[3], array[5])` is more readable then `array[(0,2,4)] = array[(1,3,5)]`. My point of such construction that later slices may generate arrays, so no changes in arrays will be needed because syntax already supports arrays as indexes. Better example is `arrays[0:4:2] = array[1:5:2]` but currently it does not work.

Author: @zygoloid,

> What would array[(0,1)] = array[(1,0)]; do?

It is a good point! It would be better to be a swap. At least, it is that what humans expect. 

> would we form an intermediate array with the selected elements?

It would be better to avoid it; but probably compiler can do small them for using vectorized instructions.

```
It requires the same sizes on the left and right sides.

> ## Rationale

Reviewer 3: It would be useful to say something about C++ compatibility and interop here, especially since the representation chosen isn't the same as in C++. Is it OK that Carbon's array representation would be different?

Author: > Is it OK that Carbon's array representation would be different?

I think that it is OK. The point of usage `void * data` is for simply interoping between C++ and Carbon.

Reviewer 2: How does that work with ownership? Could you copy a c++ array into carbon and then destroy it? What would happen there?

This proposal mostly has effect on [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution).

With array indexing, slices and vector operations it is possible to rewrite the
following code (note, here, the first index of array is `1`):
```fortran
    do i = 1, npoints
      rhosum(i) = rho(i * 2 - 1) + rho(i * 2)
    end do
```
as
```fortran

>     rhosum(1:npoints) = rho(1:2*npoints:2) + rho(2:2*npoints:2)

Reviewer 4: `[start:end]` would be great indeed, was it your intent?

> ```

Reviewer: I don't really understand what this paragraph is providing a rationale for.

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer 3: One thing I think it's worth considering is that when working with an array with a known type, unless it's got a runtime bound, we don't need to store the bound at runtime because we have it as part of the type. To that end, I think we should consider an approach where an array is a contiguous collection that doesn't store its bounds, and have a distinct type (a "span" or "array view" or similar) that represents an indirect reference to an array or subarray and does store its bounds at runtime.

This presented representation is closer to `std::vector<T>` rather then `T[]`.
Then, interoperability between C/C++ and Carbon is limited. So, alternatively,

> we may use C/C++ style arrays.

Reviewer 4: The main difference seems to be how you recommend memory allocation, it otherwise has similarities with `std::array`.

> we may use C/C++ style arrays.

Reviewer: The "alternatives considered" section needs to explain why the listed alternatives were not chosen. It might help to take a look at previous successful proposals to get an idea of what that should look like.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces array's internal representation, its declaration, and
indexing.

## Details

### Internal representation

For simplifying usage and raising safety of array's usage, internal
representation of arrays contains additional metadata:

```cpp

> template <typename T, int32_t N> struct Array {
>   std::array<int32_t, N> dimension_sizes;
>   std::unique_ptr<T[]> data;
> };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
template <typename T, int32_t Dimensions> struct Array {
  std::array<int32_t, Dimensions> dimension_sizes;
  std::unique_ptr<T[]> data;
};
```

Otherwise people might mistakenly think that the second parameter is the number of elements in the array.

```

Here, `dimension_sizes` contains information about dimensions' length. `size()`
property of `dimension_sizes` contains information about number of dimensions.
`data` is continuous in memory place keeping scalar data.

> This representation is closer to `std::array<T>` rather then `T[]`. Then,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This representation is closer to `std::vector<T>` rather then `T[]`. Then,
```

`std::array<T>` has the same representation as `T[]`. This type isn't exactly like `std::vector` either, but it seems closer.

interoperability between C++ and carbon is limited.

One-dimensional and nested arrays have `dimensions = 1`.

### Declaration

During declaration of arrays, it is more importantly to see type of variable. It
is the aim of the below presented alternatives of declaration.

Current realization (like in `Rust`):

```carbon
  var array_1D: [i32; 4];
  var array_2D: [i32; 4, 10]; // is not supported yet
  var array_nested: [[i32; 10]; 4];
```

In the case of nested array, definition of them a bit misunderstood due to
following indexing is inversed.

### Declaration like VLA

Also, it is possible to declare array in function with runtime defined size:

```carbon
  fn f(n: i32) -> i32 {
    var arr: [n; i32];
    return 0;
  }
```

Only if size is defined in compile-time and it is less than
`MAX_STACK_SIZE_ARRAY`, array is located in stack memory. Other definitions are

> located in heap memory. It is especially important for the last example.

Reviewer: When the array storage is on the stack, does this type still use the representation shown above, with a pointer to storage outside the object, or does it use a representation like `std::array`, where the storage is located within the object itself?

> ### Library API

Reviewer: Do you intend the `[T; N]` syntax to be an alias for one of these types? If so, which one?

> For arrays that size is defined in compile-time, `StaticArray(T, shape)` is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`StaticArray(T, shape)` is for arrays whose size is defined at compile-time.
```

(Grammar fix)

> `shape` contains information for `dimension_sizes`.

Reviewer: What information, exactly? More than just the number of dimensions?

stack, `BoxedArray(T, shape)`. Again, `shape` contains information for
`dimension_sizes`.

### Indexing

Indexing possible by way of integer values like in C style:

```carbon
  var array: [4; i32];
  var elem: auto = array[1];
```

and also by way of array:

```carbon
  var array_ind: [3; i32] = (0, 2, 4);
  var array1: [5; i32] = (4, 3, 2, 1, 0);
  var array2: auto = array[array_ind];
  // array2 == (array1[0], array1[2], array1[4]) == (4, 2, 0)
```

Array indexing is useful if slices generate arrays.

Indexes are also possible on left-side expression:

```carbon
  var array: [6; i32] = (5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0);
  array[(0,1,2)] = array[(3,4,5)]; // array = (2, 1, 0, 2, 1, 0)
```

It requires the same sizes on the left and right sides.

at the same time, `array[(0,1)] = array[(1,0)]` will swap elements.

## Rationale

-   [Performance-critical software](/docs/project/goals.md#performance-critical-software)
    -   No need for a lower level language. Developers will use built-in arrays
        that know enough information itself.
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution).

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer: It's important to explain the reason for not choosing these alternatives, in enough detail that future readers can understand what issues we considered, and why we made the decision we did. In a lot of ways that's going to be the most important part of this proposal. I recommend looking at some of the other documents in `proposals/` to get an idea of what that should look like.

This representation is closer to `std::array<T>` rather then `T[]`. As extension

> of `std::array<T>`, it allows to have sizes not defined in compile-time. Then,

Reviewer: As noted above, this type seems closer to `std::vector` than `std::array`.
